Course Code Course Title L T P C Engineering Physics 3 0 2 4
Pre-requisite Syllabus Version 1.0
Course Objectives 1. Understand the origin and importance of quantum mechanics. 2. To study the principles of quantum mechanics 3. To apply quantum mechanics for the understanding of quantum computing
Course Outcomes At the end of this course, the student will be able to
1 Identify limitations of classical physics through experimental observations. 2 Apply matrix algebra and Dirac notation for the understanding of quantum
mechanical problems involving linear operators, eigenvalues and eigenvectors.
3 Solve the particle in 1-D and 3-D potential box problem using the principles of quantum mechanics.
4 Apply fundamental concepts of quantum states and operators to understand the principles of quantum computing.
5 Demonstrate quantum and optical phenomena through experiments and quantum operations through simulations.
Module:1 Wave-Particle Duality 8 hours Dual nature of radiation – Young’s double slit experiment – Blackbody radiation – Planck’s hypothesis – de Broglie hypothesis – Wavefunction – Stern-Gerlach experiment. Module:2 Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics 10
hours Introduction to linear vector space – Basis vectors – Orthonormal sets – Hilbert space - Representation of quantum states using Dirac notation – Inner and outer products – Tensor product of vector spaces – Linear operators – Matrix algebra – Hermitian, Unitary and Projection operators – Eigenvalues and eigenvectors – Pauli matrices – Commutation relations. Module:3 Postulates of Quantum Mechanics 8 hours Observables  Expectation values  Measurement in Quantum Mechanics – Sequential Stern-Gerlach Experiment – Time-dependent and time-independent Schrödinger equations. Module:4 Applications of Quantum Mechanics 7 hours Particle in a one-dimensional potential well – Extension to three-dimensional potential wells – Energy eigenvalues and eigenfunctions – Degeneracy of energy levels – Quantum tunneling phenomenon – Tunneling probability Module:5 Elements of Quantum Computing 10
hours Introduction to qubits – Single qubit states and the Bloch Sphere – Two-qubit systems – Quantum entanglement and Bell states – Single-qubit gates: Pauli and Hadamard – Two-qubit gates: CNOT – Generation of entangled states. Module:6 Contemporary Topics 2 hours
Total Lecture hours: 45 hours
Text Books 1 D. J. Griffiths, Introduction to Quantum Mechanics, 2018, 3rd Edition,
Cambridge University Press, India. 2 A. C. Philips, Introduction to Quantum Mechanics, 2014, Wiley India. Reference Books
1. Robert Eisberg and Robert Resnick, Quantum Physics, 2004, 2nd Edition. Wiley India.
2. Michael A. Nielsen and Isaac L. Chuang, Quantum Computation and Quantum Information, 2010, Cambridge Universities Press, India.
Mode of Evaluation: Quiz, Assignment, CAT and FAT
List of Challenging and Mini Projects - CHAMP (Indicative) 1. Exploring the wave nature of electrons through diffraction. 2. Determine the fundamental quantum constant through the analysis of
semiconductor junction characteristics. 3. Elemental analysis through photoelectron spectroscopy. 4. Unveiling stellar composition through quantum simulations of hydrogen
spectral lines. 5. Modeling time dependent behaviour of quantum wave packets. 6. Designing a solar cell based renewable energy device circuits for electric
power generation. 7. Analyze photodiode I–V characteristics under different light intensities to
extract device parameters. 8. Visualize the uncertainty principle by simulating position-momentum
evolution of quantum wave packets. 9. Simulate the Schrödinger equation to demonstrate quantum superposition
and state collapse. 10. Model tunneling through barriers of different profiles and study dependence
on particle energy. 11. Visualize the Bloch sphere representation of a single qubit through
simulation. 12. Demonstrate the fundamental operations of single-qubit quantum gates via
simulation. 13. Simulating a 2-Qubit Quantum Gate (CNOT or Bell State Creation) 14. Simulate the superposition state of a single qubit using the Hadamard. 15. Generate and analyze Bell states using quantum circuit simulation.
Total Laboratory Hours 30 hours
Text Book(s) 1 .
Michael A. Nielsen & Isaac L. Chuang, Quantum Computation and Quantum Information, 2010, Cambridge University Press, India
Reference Books 1 .
Aurthur Beiser, Concepts of Modern Physics, 2009, McGraw - Hill, 6th Edition, India
Mode of assessment: Continuous assessment, FAT, Oral examination Recommended by Board of Studies